---

copyright:
  years: 2017, 2020, 2021
lastupdated: "2021-02-24"

keywords: data at rest encryption, envelope encryption, root key, data encryption key, protect data encryption key, encrypt data encryption key, wrap data encryption key, unwrap data encryption key

subcollection: key-protect

---

{:shortdesc: .shortdesc}
{:screen: .screen}
{:pre: .pre}
{:table: .aria-labeledby="caption"}
{:external: target="_blank" .external}
{:codeblock: .codeblock}
{:tip: .tip}
{:note: .note}
{:important: .important}
{:term: .term}

# Protecting data with envelope encryption
{: #envelope-encryption}

Envelope encryption is the practice of encrypting data with a data 
encryption key (DEK) and then encrypting the DEK with a fully 
manageable root key.
{: shortdesc}

When working with sensitive data in a world with where hackers are prevalent, 
it is necessary to use advanced encryption techniques to protect your data. When 
you encrypt your data, it encrypted with a Data Encryption Key (DEK). A DEK is an encryption 
key that is designed to encrypt and decrypt data and can be generated and managed 
by your service or an IBM Cloud service.

While the DEK secures your data, the DEK itself is also 
susceptible to attacks so you should take preventative measures to protect your 
DEKs by using envelope encryption. Envelope encryption is the process of protecting 
your DEKs by encrypting them with a [root key](#key-types). 
The same root key is used to decrypt your DEK. Note that you can use multiple root keys
to encrypt the same DEK. 

## How it works
{: #overview}

Envelope encryption combines the strength of multiple encryption algorithms to
protect your sensitive data in the cloud. It works by using a root key to 
wrap (encrypt) one or more data encryption keys (DEKs). The root key safeguards 
your wrapped (encrypted) DEKs with encryption algorithms, protecting them from 
unauthorized access or exposure. 

Unwrapping a DEK reverses the envelope encryption process by using the associated 
root key, resulting in a decrypted and authenticated DEK. A wrapped DEK cannot 
be unwrapped without the associated root key, which adds an extra layer of 
security to your data.

Envelope encryption is treated briefly in the NIST Special Publication 800-57,
Recommendation for Key Management. To learn more, see
[NIST SP 800-57 Pt. 1 Rev. 4.](https://www.nist.gov/publications/recommendation-key-management-part-1-general-0){: external}

## Key types
{: #key-types}

The service supports two key types, root keys and standard keys, for the
advanced encryption and management of data.

<dl>
  <dt>
    Root keys
  </dt>
  <dd>
    <p>
      Root keys are primary resources in
      {{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}}. They are symmetric
      key-wrapping keys used as roots of trust for wrapping (encrypting) and
      unwrapping (decrypting) other keys stored in a data service. Root keys 
      contain key material that is used to wrap and unwrap DEKs. The key 
      material of the root key can either be imported or generated by the 
      {{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}} service.
    </p>
    <p>
      With {{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}}, you can create,
      store, and manage the lifecycle of root keys to achieve full control of
      other DEKs stored in the cloud. Unlike a standard key, the plaintext of 
      a root key can never leave the bounds of the
      {{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}} service.
    </p>
  </dd>

  <dt>
    Standard keys
  </dt>
  <dd>
    Standard keys, which can be used as DEKs, can store encrypted data in 
    {{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}}. Once your plaintext 
    standard key is generated and protecting underlying data, destroy the 
    plaintext and safely store the encrypted standard key. 
  </dd>
</dl>

## Wrapping keys with envelope encryption
{: #wrapping}

You can wrap one or more DEKs with advanced encryption algorithms by
designating a root key in {{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}} that
you can fully manage.

Complete the following steps to encrypt data via envelope encryption:

1. Generate or use a provisioned DEK from an IBM Cloud service to encrypt 
   your sensitive data.
2. [Generate](/docs/key-protect?topic=key-protect-create-root-keys) 
   or [import](/docs/key-protect?topic=key-protect-import-root-keys) 
   a root key that will be used to protect the DEK from step 1.
3. Use the root key to [wrap](/docs/key-protect?topic=key-protect-wrap-keys
   the DEK. To provide maximum encryption security, you can specify additional 
   authenticated data (AAD) during your wrap request. Note that the same 
   authentication data will be required when unwrapping the DEK.
4. Store and maintain the base64 encoded wrapped DEK output in a secure location,
   such as an app or service.

You can generate a new DEK by omitting the `plaintext` property in your 
wrap request. The newly created DEK will automatically be wrapped as part
of the request.
{: note}

## Unwrapping keys
{: #unwrapping}

Unwrapping a data encryption key (DEK) decrypts and authenticates the data
protected within the key.

If your business application needs to access the contents of your wrapped DEKs,
you can use the
[{{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}} API](/apidocs/key-protect#invoke-an-action-on-a-key){: external}
to send an unwrap request to the service. 


Complete the following steps to encrypt data via envelope encryption:

1. Retrieve the base64 encoded ciphertext of the wrapped DEK.
2. Retrieve the key ID value of the root key.
3. Make an unwrap request to [{{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}} Unwrap API](/apidocs/key-protect#invoke-an-action-on-a-key){: external}.
   Note that if you specified additional authenticated data (AAD) in a previous 
   wrap request, you must supply them in your unwrap request.
4. Use the returned base64 encoded plaintext to decrypt the data protected under
   the DEK.

## Integrating with {{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} Services
{: #envelope-encryption-integration}

{{site.data.keyword.keymanagementservicefull}} integrates with a number of
{{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} services to enable encryption with
customer-managed keys for those services.

Associating a resource in your cloud data service with a root key in
{{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}} allows your data to be protected
at rest while having management control of the root key.

For more information on the services that offer integration with
{{site.data.keyword.keymanagementserviceshort}}, see
[Integrating Services](/docs/key-protect?topic=key-protect-integrate-services).
